HISTORICAL FACTS, OF THE NIGERIAN NAIRA
President Ibrahim Badamosi Babaginda-IBB (1985 to 1993)
The real trouble of the Nigerian Naira kicked off during this period after a lot of coup and counter coup deters. During his reign, Structural Adjustment programme (SAP), Second Tier Foreign Exchange Market (SFEM), which both introduced the parallel exchange market known as the black market were introduced. Following IBB’s exit in 1993, the Naira was already exchanging at seventeen (17) naira units to a US dollar. This can be proportionately represented as a 17% depreciation index in in compares to the US dollar. This was the beginning of Nigeria’s economic gloom as things worsened by the day for ordinary Nigerians on the streets of the country and crime syndicates increased exponentially as a result of a weaker National currency that never produced industrialization but rather bankruptcy and untold debt, hardship to its citizens.

President Sanni Abacha (1993 to 1998)
Sanni Abacha came on board in 1993, during a time of political turmoil that engulfed the country from cancellation of June 12, 1992 Elections. At this time, the naira had slipped to twenty two (22) naira units to a US dollar. During his regime, the Autonomous Foreign Exchange Market (AFEM) came to light as a regulatory body to handle forex exchange. Handling the official rate was at an angle whilst handling the demand for the dollar was another. The other side was the un-restricted pull and urge to bring finished goods from overseas that could be locally produced for consumer utilities which invariably pushed the value of the naira exchange rate beyond the regulations to Nigeria’s Central Bank.  This unrealistic scenery led to a loose margin that was well exploited by the parallel exchange market, known as the “Black Market”, and huge exploitation by some banks who had direct access to buy from Nigeria’s AFEM, managed by their Central BANK, in turn sell at ridiculously high margins inimical to the country’s economic growth.
President Olusegun Obasanjo (Joseph Sanusi (CBN governor 1999 to 2004))
Between the exit of Sanni Abacha, the interim Government leading to the fresh installation of democracy in 1999 of President Olusegun Obasanjo, the dollar Naira exchange rate was already hitting close to 100 naira units to a dollar. The fate of the naira was dwindling between 80 to 100 units to a single dollar between 1998 and 1999.
Joseph Sanusi, CBN Governor of Nigeria within 1999 to 2004, brought in Interbank Foreign Exchange Market (IFEM) who still kept the official exchange rate at wide margin to the parallel exchange market. Up until then, economic exploits of this odd margin of exchange rate kept heavy damage along its paths to the blare and disadvantage of the Nigerian people.
Quack banks were set up everywhere who did not care to invest in the real economy but rather blossomed by just leveraging on the difference between the official exchange rate and the parallel exchange market and helped ship stolen funds abroad for keeping.
Meanwhile, Nigeria’s foreign debt rose exponentially and consumed its National foreign reserves throughout this period.


President Olusegun Obasanjo (II Term)
Chukwuma Soludo (2004-2009) Tenures

During the course of 2003, it would be recalled that oil prices inflated worldwide from $30 to $140 per barrel in 2008. This made Nigeria’s foreign reserve to rise exponentially giving birth to the Excess crude oil Account known as (ECA) with over $20 billion at some time in 2008. Soludo really had credits for synchronizing CBN, Bureau DE Change, Wire Rates and Interbank exchange values. He also made provision for local industries who required a foreign component or raw material to finish their production for consumption.

In addition, during Soludo’s time, Naira gained 20% against the dollar based on actionable policies made by the incumbent Central Bank Governor. This also helped the economy to stabilize against the drop in oil prices in 2008, since Nigeria’s foreign reserve was about $62 billion. Soludo Chukwuma, also recapitalized the Nigeria’s banks as a means of removing mushroom banks littering the entire country who were not making any meaningful impact on the Nigerian Economy.
Soludo’s entry met the exchange rate at 127 Naira to 1 dollar, and his exit in 2009 left the exchange rate at 147 naira to a single dollar unit despite the fact that it went its gains of 20% less than a year ago.

President YarAdua/Jonathan 
CBN Governor: Sanusi Lamido Sanusi ,  (June 2009-Feb 2014/15)

Governor Sanusi Lamido Sanusi, upon assumption of office in June 2009 quickly reinstated Interbank Exchange but had issues with maintaining the value of the Naira. He used early release of Government bonds for sale to stimulate consumer spending but this was to no avail as Nigeria’s real economic sector that complemented the oil revenue in the late 1960s to early 1980s was abandoned. Though, it was during Sanusi Lamido’s tenure that the country was placed on JP Morgan index. Naira managed to sustain an exchange rate to 148 to a dollar unit. However by the time he too left office, in 2014, naira had taken a deeper plunge against the dollar to a value of 164 to a US dollar unit. In fact, between 2014 and 2016, Nigeria witnessed the greatest National currency devaluation with a time where dollar exchanged between an alarming 200 to 500 naira units to a single dollar currency.

President Mohammed Buhari, 
CBN Governor Godwin Eme?ele:  Current Economic Index of  Nigeria

Now, let’s do a little math logic. It is generally believed that $30 USD to bring up a single barrel of crude oil in Nigeria. If oil is being sold for $120, removing the expense of $30, leaves a profit of $90 USD. However, if there is a sudden crash in demand and crude oil price falls below $30 USD, then there is a real problem because an economy dependent on crude oil as major earner will be bankrupt immediately.


Suffice it to say now that, as at the time of this writing, oil prices have dropped by at least over 55%, thereby jettisoning Nigeria’s National income by over 75%, this comes as no surprize, since its sole product dependence for national income is crude oil. In other words, this practice adversely affects Nigeria’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) & Gross National Product (GNP) and spiking high Interest rate, which inflates production costs and eventually consumer goods and services.

With the very common occurrence of public fund theft and diversion that has rocked Nigeria for over 30 years, Nigeria is quite in-equipped to face recession, stabilize and quickly make economic recovery. This puts public resources and services at a complete risk, with central Governments at the brink of inability to pay worker’s salaries or wages, alarming youths without means of livlihood. Nigeria’s current National foreign reserve is estimated to be over $30 billion USD. Other oil producing countries in the World such as Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, and Saudi Arabia are examples of countries that are effectively managing their crude oil earnings while it lasts. The current CBN Governor of Nigeria, Godwin Emefiele, has directed a lock down on funding for goods that can be easily produced in Nigeria recently. One good thing he also did was synchronizing the parallel exchange rate with the official rate, thereby removing the “ghost” margin that wrecked the country for years. 
In summary of this literature review, there is need for Nigeria to:
1.	Extremely diversify its source for foreign exchange reserve, so when an unexpected recession hits, the reserves can salvage its citizens from untold hardship or transference to other countries who definitely have theirs to carry
2.	Save for the rainy day. 
